Let's explore our second strategy for
graph search, namely depth-first search.
And again, like with breadth-first search,
I'll open by just reminding you what
depth-first search is good for and we'll
trace through it in a particular example,
and then we'll tell you
what the actual code is.
So if breadth-first search is the cautious
and tentative exploration strategy,
then depth-first search or DFS for
short is its more aggressive cousin.
So the plan is to explore aggressively and
only back track when necessary.
And this is very much the strategy one
often uses when trying to solve a maze.
To explain what I mean let
me show you how this would
work in the same running example we used
when we discussed breadth-first search.
So here if we invoke depth-first
search from the node number S,
here's what's going to happen.
So obviously we start at S and obviously
there's two places where we can go next.
We can go to A or to B.
And depth-first search is under determine
like breadth-first search we can
pick either one.
Select with a breadth-first search
example let's go to A first.
So A will be the second
one that we explore.
But now, unlike breadth first search where
we automatically went to node B next,
since that was the other layer one node.
Here, the only rule is that we have to go
next to one of A's immediate neighbors.
We might go to B, but we're not going to B
because it is one of the neighbor's of S,
we go because it is one
of the neighbors of A.
And actually to make sure the difference
is clear let's assume that we aggressively
pursue deeper when we go from A to C and
now the depth first search strategy is
again to just pursue deeper, so you go
to one of C's immediate neighbors, so
maybe we go to E next, so
E is going to be the fourth one visited.
Now from E there's only one neighbor not
counting the one that we came in on so
from E we go to D.
And D is the fifth one we see.
Now from D we have a choice,
we can either go to B or we could go to C.
So let's suppose we go to C from D.
Well then we get to a node number
three where we've been before.
And as usual we're going to keep
track of where we've already been.
So at this point we have to
back track from C back to D.
We retreat to D.
Now, there's still another outgoing
edge from D to explore and
then they'll be the one to B.
And so what happens is we actually wind
up wrapping all the way around this outer
cycle and we could B sixth.
And now, of course,
anywhere we try to explore we see
somewhere we've already been.
So, from B we try to go to S, but
we've been there so we retreat to B.
We can try to go to A but
Now we've explored all
of the options out of B.
So we have to retreat from B,
we have to go back to D.
Now from D we've explored both B and
C so we have to retreat back to E.
We've explored the only outgoing arc D,
so we have to retreat to C.
We retreat to A.
From A we actually haven't yet
looked along this arc, but
that just sends us to B
where we have been before.
So then we retreat back to A.
Finally we retreat back to S and S,
even at S there's still
an extra edge to explore.
At S we say,
we haven't tried this as B-edge yet.
But of course, when we look across we
get the B where we've been before and
then we backtrack to S.
Then we've looked at every edge once,
and so we stop.
So that's how depth-first search works.
You just pursue your path,
you go to an immediate
neighbor as long as you can until you
hit somewhere you've been before.
And then you retreat.
So you might be wondering why bother
with another graph search strategy?
After all we have breadth-first search,
which seemed pretty awesome, right.
It runs in linear time.
It's guaranteed to find everything you
might want to find, it computes shortest
paths, it computes connected components
if you embed it in a foreloop.
It kind of seems like,
what else would you want?
Well, it turns out,
depth-first search is going to have its
own impressive catalogue of applications,
which you can't necessarily
replicate with breadth-first search.
And I'm going to focus on
applications in directed graphs.
So there's going to be a simple one that
we discuss in this video, and then there's
going to be a more complicated one that
has a separate video devoted to it.
So in this video we're
going to be discussing,
computing topological orderings
of directed acyclic graphs.
That is, directed graphs
that have no directed cycle.
The more complicated application is
computing strongly connected components in
directed graphs.
The run time will be, essentially,
the same as it was for
breadth-first search, and the best we
could hope for, which is linear time.
And again, we're not assuming that
there's necessarily that many edges.
There may be much fewer
edges than vertices.
So linear time and these connectivity
applications means O of M plus n.
So let's not talk about the actual
code of depth for search.
There's a couple of ways to do it.
One way to do it is to just make some
minor modifications to the code for
breadth for a search.
The primary difference being
instead of using a queue in its
first in first out behavior, you swap in a
stack with its last in first out behavior.
Again, if you don't know what a stack is
you should read about that in the program
textbook or on the web.
It's something that supports constant
time insertions to the front and
constant time deletions from the front,
unlike a queue which is meant to support
constant time deletions to the back.
Okay so stack that operates just like
those cafeteria trays that you know where
you put in a tray and
the last one that got pushed in when
you take the first one out that's
the last one that got put in.
So these are called push and pop,
in a stack context both are constant time.
So if you swap out the queue
you swap in the stack,
make a couple other minor modifications.
Breadth-first search turns
into depth-first search.
For the sake of both variety and elegance,
I'm instead going to show
you a recursive version.
So depth-first search is very naturally
phrased as a recursive algorithm,
and that's what we'll discuss here.
So, depth-first search, of course,
takes as input a graph g and
again it could be undirected or directed.
It doesn't matter, just with a directed
graph be sure that you only follow arcs
in the appropriate direction,
which should be automatically handled
in the adjacency lists of your
graph data structure anyways.
So as always we keep a Boolean
local to each vertex of the graph,
remembering whether we've
been there before or not.
And of course, as soon as we start
exploring from S we better make a note
that now we have been there.
We better plant a flag, as it were.
And remember, depth-first search is
an aggressive search, so we immediately
try to recursively search from any of S's
neighbors that we haven't already been to.
And now, if we find such a vertex,
if we find somewhere we've never been,
we recursively call depth-first
search from that node.
The basic guarantees of depth-first search
are exactly the same as they were for
breath-first search.
We find everything we could possibly hope
to find and we do it in linear time.
And once again, the reason is this is
simply a special case of the generic
stretch procedure that we started
this sequence of videos about.
So it just corresponds to a particular
way of choosing amongst multiple crossing
edges between the region
of explored nodes, and
between the region of unexplored nodes.
Essentially always being biased toward the
most recently discovered explored nodes.
And just like, breadth for search, the
running time is going to be proportional
to the size of the component
that you're discovering.
And the basic reason is that each
node is looked at only once, right?
This boolean makes sure that we don't
ever explore a node more than once, and
then for each edge, we look at it at
most twice, once from each endpoint.
And given that these exact same two
claims hold for depth-first search as for
breadth-first search, that means if we
wanted to compute connected components in
an undirected graph,
we could equally well use an outer for
loop with depth-first search as
our workhorse in the inner loop.
It wouldn't matter.
Either of those for undirected graphs,
depth-first search, breadth-first search,
is going to find all the connected
components in O of n plus m time,
in linear time.
So instead, I want to focus on an
application in particular to depth-first
search, and
this is about finding a topological
ordering of a directed acyclic graph.